- a network consists of two or more entities or objects sharing resources and information.
- a computer network consists of 2 or more comuted device connected to each other to share resources and information .
- network becomes powerful tool when computers communicate and share resources with other computers on the same network or entirely distinct networks.
computer
1. client computer
-- out computer 
3. server computer
-- controls and provides access to resources.
   - have higher RAM , CPU AND STORAGE
- server Rack
   - switch 
   - modem
   - servers 
   - firewall
   - display
why we need of network
- to enhance communication
- share resources 
- facilitate centralized management
- internet
- 
Classification by network geography
- LAN, WAN, 

1. LAN
- local area network
- cover very small area like classroom.
- inexpensive to install 
2. MAN
- metropolitan area network 
- like city 
- the cost of installation and operation is higher
- use high speed such as fiber optics to achieve higher speeds
- CAN = campus area network 
3. WAN
- span larger area other than a single city 
- like one country to another country
- use long distance telecommunication networks for connection , thereby increasing the cost.
- internet is a good example of WAN.
classification based on component roles
1. peer to peer
 - all computers are considered equal.
 - cheap and easy 
 - are popular as home networks and for use in smal campanies.
 - maximum number of peers that can operate here is 10.
 - are
2. server based 
- offers centralized control and is designed for secure operations.
3. client based
- the client acts as a server.
- it is peer to the others 
- the peer computers are not directly connected to each other rather they are connected by the server
### IP/Internet Protocol/ address
it used to lemeleyet andn computer ke and computer
- is a network layer protocol
- is unique identifier

####USAGE OF IP'S 
- used to connect to another computer or network
IP TYPES
based on ip version
1. ip v4
2. ipv6

1. Ipv4
- is 32 bit sequence of 1s and 0s
- to make ip address easier to use , the address is written as four decimal numbers separated by periods.
- this way of writing the address is called the dotted decimal format.
- ip generated by DHCP or manually.
IP STRUCTURE
has four section
- each section is 8 bits long.
- 192.168.123.12 
each section can range from0 to 255
- when you connect to some network an ip address will be generated and given ( automatically by HCP or static way).
- every IP address has two parts:
- network- to identify the network
- host- to identify the user
- 192.168.123.12
- network.network.network.hostthe first host address is called GATEWAY ADDRESS

There are 5 classes of private IP address A B C D E
CLASS A= Government
CLASS B= medium companies
CLASS C 

CLASS A
- have 24 bits of space for host 
- 10.2.3.1
- network.host.host.host
- used to lemeyaz bzu computerochn 
- number of hosts per network
- number of networks 126
- first octet adddress range 0-127
- high order bits 
- 16,777,216
CLASS B
have 16 bit of space for hosts
- network . network .host . host
- have 65,536 number of hosts per network
- have 16,384 number of networks
- first octet address range 128-191
CLASS C
have 8 bit space for hosts and 24 bit of network
- network. network. network. host
- no of hosts per network
- 2,097,152 no of networks
- first octet 192-223
- high order bits 110
- used for our home, school , work space
RESERVED IP ADDRESS
- can not be assigned to devices on a network.
- addresses begining 127 are reserved for loopback and internal testing(for localhost).
- an IP address that has binary 0s in all host bit position is reserved for the network address . 
- An IP address that has binary 1 or 255 in all host bit position is reserved for the broadcast address.
resereved
- 0.0.0.0
- 127.0.0.0

IPV6 (internet protocol version6)
- is 128 bit alpha numeric long value that identifies an endpoint devices in IPV6 network.
- format of an IPV6 address.
- be hulet netib new yemileyew
- Format of an IPV6 address:
- FE80:CD00:0000:0CDE:1257:0000:211E:729C
- ALPHANumeric
- separated by colon:
- IP generated automatically
- the main difference is IP space(host holding)
- ipv4 holds 32 bit ip address but ipv6 holds 128 bit ip address.
PRIVATE AND PUBLIC IP ADDRESS
- any host have 2 different IP'S
- PUBLIC IP :
- is an ip address that is given to the host on the WAN network
- kenya network wuchi yalu yemiyakun 
- private ip 
- is ip that is given to the host on LAN NETWORK.
- internet and intranet
public ip 
curl ifconfig.me
private ip 
ipconfig

ipv4 = eyanesu new 
why do we need ipv6
- lack of ipb4 even in class A is not enough
- ISP- internet yemiyaerbuln 
- ISP in ethiopia are ethiotelecom, safaricom
- enesu up geztew new
- IP ADDRESS are limited, and expensive
- in our country we don't have that much IP'S there for many people have the same IP ADDRESS.
- location of person 
- unique identifier
- do people hack with IP address
- static and dynamic DHCP
- dynamic kehone hack ayderegm
- Client computer and mobile use dynamic assigning by default.
- changed when you restart or rest ur phone or router.
- lack of ipv4(poor country)
NAT(network address translation)
- it translates public id to private id. 
- this allows devices in a private network to access the internet while conserving public IP addresses.
- provides a basic level of security by hiding internal ip addresses 
NETWORK DIVISION
- We can use some techniques to segment and classify our networks.
- 1. VLAN(virtual local area)
- this means creating different virtual LAN'S based on 1 IP
-  be and ip yemetawn network wede tinanish local area networkoch mekefafel.
- 2. subnetting= this is segmenting the IP address based on subnet mask

- MAC Address(Media Access Control)
- kutru yemimetaw computerun keseraw manufacturer network adapter new.network adapter malet hardware device new that helps us to have a connection (our wifi adapter)
- mac is alpha numeric with 2 parts : 1.organization unique id
- 2. universally administered address.
- 48 bit data
- have 6 octets.
- use hex(Alpha numeric)
- mac is alpha numeric with 2 parts : 1.organization unique id
- 2. universally administered address.
- ==00|1A|3F==|F1|4C|C6
- organizationally unique identifier 
- assigned by the first 24 bits of the address.
- e.g 00-15-C5 corresponds to "Del inc"
- remainder of mac address
- allocated by manufacturer
- e.g 49-04-A9 for my ethernet card.

OSI (open system interconnection) reference model
- layeroch andu technology kelelaw yemigbabubet
- osi reference model = internationally standardized network architecture.
- specified in ISO 7498.
- It is an idea model to show the way of network work.
- model has 7 layers.
- it shows how data transfers between 2 hosts or servers.
this layers are 7
- layer7 application layer
- layer 6 presentation layer 
- layer 5 session layer
- layer 4 transport layer
- layer 3 network layer
- layer 2 data link layer
- layer 1 physical layer
layer 1-4 relate to communications technology
layer 5-7 relate to user applications.
the sequence differ when sender and receiver use it.
### network protocols
are rules and conventions that govern how data is transmited and receive over a network. they define the methods for communication between network devices .

### layer 7 : Application layer 
services that has direct access to soft ware applications for file transfers, database acess and main , browsers
your data is DATA
PROTOCOLS : HTTP , FTP....

### layer 6 : presentation layer
related to representation of transmitted data 
translates different data representations from the application layer into uniform standard format 
providing services for secure efficient data transmission 
e.g data encryption and data compression.
your data is data
PROTOCOLS : SSL 
zip madreg, size masanes ....

### layer 5 : session layer
it's like menged mezergat for the transmission
allows 2 computers on different computers to establish use and end a session for file transfer, remote login etc.
establish dialog control 
regulates which side transmits , plus when and how long it transmits.
performs token management and synchronization.
your data is DATA.
protocols : RPC , NETBIOS

### layer 4: transport layer 
manages transmission packets.
from the senders angle :repackages long messages when necessary into small packers for transmission 
from the receiver angle: reassembles packets in correct order to get the original message. 

Handles error recognition and recovery . 
transport layer at receiving and acknowledges packet delivery 
resend missing packet
your datais SEGMENTS
Protocols : TCP , UDP 

### layer 3 : network layer
manages addressing / routing of data within the ip range
addresses messages and translates logical addresses and names into physial addresses
determines the route from the source to the destination 
manages traffic problems , such as switching , routing and controlling the congestion of data packets. 
- leyetnyaw computer endemiders yemiwesenbet
your data is PACKETS.
PROTOCOLS : ICMP , ARP , NAT , IP


### layer 2: data link layer
mac address meletef
packages raw bits from the physical layer into frames ( logical , structured packets for data) [receiver]
provides reliable transmission of frames
it waits for acknowledgment from the receiving computer.
retransmitts frames for which acknowledgment not receives.
your data is FRAMES.
PROTOCOLs : PPP, NDP , CDP 

### LAYER 1:  PHYSICAL LAYER
finally transmit yemideregew neger kene computer yiwetal interms of bits
transmits bits from one computer to another
regulates the transmision of a stream of bits over a physical medium .
defines how the cable is attached to the network adapter and what transmission technique is used to send data over the cable deals with issues like 
- the definition of 0 and 1 e.g how many volts represent a 1 and how long a bit lasts?
- how many pins a connector has and what the function of each pin is? 
- your data is bits.
- PROTOCOLS / DEVICES : RS-449.


### TCP AND UDP 

TCP (transmission control protocol)
huletum merejan korarto lemasgebat.
gn TCP mnm loss yelewm every data betikikil yigebal udp lay data loss linor yichilal 
TCP 
- reliable
- connection oriented protocol 
- it establish user receiver connection
- uses 3 way handshake 
- slow
UDP 
user datagram protocol
connectionless
not reliable.
fast

TCP/IP Model

- it is a reference model like osi model 
- devisochun lemagbabat ke osi yeteshale new
 - instead of 7 layer 5 layer new yalachew 
 - Application layer
 - Transport layer
 - Network layer
 - network access layer 

### Networking tools
 - hardware devices to connect different computers 
 - layer 7 firewall
 - layer 6 no devices
 - layer 5 no devices
 - layer 4 no devices
 - layer 3 routers, layer 3 switch
 - layer 2 switch, bridge
 - layer1 hub, cables, repeater

layer 1 : HUB
it is a device used to  ke hulet belay yehonu computerochn lemagenanyet
it broadcasts data to all devices connected to it. 

layer1: repeater
to amplify the speed of internet in long route

layer 1 : network cables.
used to connect 2 different network devices or computers 
there are many cables type
1. coaxial cable
- primary used for cable television internet connections and other types of data transmission over long distance
2. twisted pair cable
-  internet bet
- used in telecommunication and computer networks including ethernet networks 
- over long distance they are more susceptibleto signal degradation compared to coaxial and fibre optic
3. fibre optics cable
- have high speed data transmission especially internet backbones
- long distance telecommunication network
- termus new so tinikake yifelgal
- more expensive and delicate compared to others 
- installation requires specialized skills
layer 2 : switches
operates at 2 layer to connect devices within the same network 
it uses mac address to forward data
it sends data for specific sew

layer 3 : routers
use ip address
it routes data between different network by using ip department

layer 1 : firewall
- firewall is a network security device that monitors incoming and outgoing 
- every os have firewall built-in.
- it has a form hard ware and software
 

